         The e-puck, a Robot Designed for Education in Engineering

       Francesco Mondada1, Michael Bonani1, Xavier Raemy2, James Pugh2, Christopher Cianci2,
 Adam Klaptocz3, St ephane´ Magnenat1, Jean-Christophe Zufferey3, Dario Floreano3, Alcherio Martinoli2

  Abstract— Mobile robots have the potential to become the
ideal tool to teach a broad range of engineering disciplines.
Indeed, mobile robots are getting increasingly complex and
accessible. They embed elements from diverse ﬁelds such as
mechanics, digital electronics, automatic control, signal pro-
cessing, embedded programming, and energy management.
Moreover, they are attractive for students which increases
their motivation to learn. However, the requirements of an
effective education tool bring new constraints to robotics. This
article presents the e-puck robot design, which speciﬁcally
targets engineering education at university level. Thanks to its
particular design, the e-puck can be used in a large spectrum
of teaching activities, not strictly related to robotics. Through
a systematic evaluation by the students, we show that the e-
puck ﬁts this purpose and is appreciated by 90 percent of a
large sample of students.

                I. INTRODUCTION
                                                                   Fig. 1. The e-puck robot.
  Mobile robots are both fascinating objects and the result
of the fusion of multiple competences. This fascination
leads to the organization of plenty of robotics contests The Khepera II from K-Team is a redesign of the
worldwide annually [16]. From an engineering point of original Khepera robot [15]. With the same size of the
view, the design and control of mobile robots requires skills original Khepera, it is compatible with its extensions,
in many disciplines such as mechanics, electronics, energy software, and scientiﬁc tools. The Khepera II is interesting
management, computer science, signal processing, and because its size allows to use it on a desktop. It is expensive
automatic control. The combination of these two aspects (around 1500 e for a basic conﬁguration) but is known for
(fascination and inter-disciplinarity) makes mobile robots being reliable and well supported.
an excellent educational platform that enables students to The Hemisson from K-Team is a cheap platform (225 e)
address a broad range of engineering ﬁelds.         with a diameter of 120 mm. It only provides a limited
  This paper presents, for the ﬁrst time, the design ap-
                        1                           computational power and few sensors in its basic conﬁgu-
proach resulting in the e-puck , an educational desktop mo- ration, but is extensible. It is a robust platform well suited
                        ´
bile robot developed at the Ecole Polytechnique Fed´ erale´ for beginners.
de Lausanne (EPFL) for a broad exploitation in teaching
                                                      The IdMind’s circular GT kit is a similar platform
activities. The main objectives of this development were:
                                                    slightly cheaper (210 e) with a diameter of 150 mm. It
  • The use of a common platform in all EPFL courses has less standard extensions than Hemisson, but has more
    related to mobile robotics, to replace the different I/O available ports to connect self-made extensions. It is
    robots previously in use.                       more suited for experimentation using custom self-made
  • The use of a mobile robot in non-robotic courses, extensions.
    for instance signal processing, automatic control, and Even cheaper (175 e), the platform Bot’n Roll is
    embedded programming, in order to propose more  representative of a set of simple robots with few sensors
    project-based exercises.                        that are excellent starting kits for beginners. This and
  • The introduction of mobile robots earlier in the the previous kit improve their accessibility by providing
    curriculum, which implies the deployment in larger graphic programming environments.
    classes (50 to 100 students).                     The Lego Mindstorms RCX was the ﬁrst robotic plat-
                                                    form from the Lego company. The RCX is built around a
       II. EXISTING ROBOTS FOR EDUCATION
                                                    small 8 bit processor and can manage only 3 inputs and
  A wide range of mobile robots are available on the 3 outputs (typically DC motors without encoder); but the
market. In this section we survey the subset of them that combination with the Lego bricks makes it a fantastic tool
we think to be relevant as educational platforms.   to discover new robots shapes. The RCX has been replaced
                                                    in 2006 by the Lego Mindstorms NXT. This newer version
 This work was supported by the Ecole´ Polytechnique Fed´ erale´ de Lau-
sanne, Switzerland (EPFL, http://www.epfl.ch) in the framework is equipped with more advanced sensors, including color
of a FIFO project (Fond pour l’Innovation dans la Formation). All authors and sound, and can drive motors equipped with encoders.
are associated with EPFL, in the following laboratories: 1. Laboratoire de It is a clear reference in the ﬁeld because of its good
Systemes` Robotiques, 2. Distributed Intelligent Systems and Algorithms
Laboratory, 3. Laboratory of Intelligent Systems.   computational power, its ﬂexibility and interesting price
 1e-puck: http://www.e-puck.org                     (260 e).
  The Palm Pilot Robot Kit (PPRK) is a commercially cleaning module, this platform provides low cost mobil-
available platform2 from Carnegie Mellon University com- ity (100 e). Its sensors, designed for vacuum cleaning
bining a mobile base and a personnal digital assistant tasks, offer a good support for reactive navigation. The
(PDA), originally a Palm Pilot. The PDA provides the limited internal processor, dedicated to the low-level robot
computational power and the user interface and controls the control, is programmable by simple scripts. Any advanced
sensors and the actuators through a serial connection with programming or supplementary I/O requires an additional
a PIC processor. The result is a compact omnidirectional main processor.
platform with three distance sensors (in its basic conﬁg-
uration for 250 e). Furthermore, the availability and the III. ROBOT DESIGN FOR ENGINEERING EDUCATION
maturity of Palm development tools makes this platform Most of the aforementioned products are exclusively
an interesting starting kit.                        either efﬁcient mobile robots or good educational tools.
  The   Cye  platform3  is  a  medium-size   robot  However, being both implies the following criteria:
(40×28×13   cm) equipped  with special wheels that    • Desktop size. A robot that can evolve on the desk
ensure a good odometry. Its price is around 540 e.      near the computer improves drastically the student
Designed for indoor domestic environments, Cye can      efﬁciency during experimentation. We consider that
carry extensions such as a vacuum cleaner and can       for a good mobility, the experimentation space should
navigate in indoor environments.                        be 10 times the diameter of the robot. On a table, this
  The Khepera III from K-Team is a research oriented    implies a robot diameter smaller than 80 mm.
platform much larger than the Khepera II (120 mm of   • Wide range of possibilities from an engineering and
diameter). It is adaptable to speciﬁc research requirements educational point of view. To exploit this tool in
through extensions, for instance the korebot board which various ﬁelds of education such as signal processing,
provides an XScale processor. Flexible, efﬁcient, and pow- automatic control, embedded programming, or dis-
erful with respect to its size, this robot is also quite tributed intelligent systems design, the robot should
expensive as an educational robot (around 2000 e in basic provide a wide set of functionalities in its basic
conﬁguration).                                          version.
                                 4
  The ER1 from  Evolution Robotics is a simple alu-   • User friendly. The user interface has to be simple,
minum  frame kit supporting a laptop (not included) and efﬁcient, and intuitive. This is an important point for
equipped with wheels. The laptop provides the computa-  the acceptance of the system by the students.
tional hardware, which improves the performance / cost ra- • Low cost. The broad introduction in engineering
                                              e
tio of the kit (the basic conﬁguration costs around 230 ). classes requires a large number of robots. Knowing
The motor wheels controller has some free inputs/outputs that the budget of many schools is constant or de-
but provides limited computational power. This low-cost creasing, this is only feasible by reducing the cost of
kit comes with a sophisticated but expensive software   an individual robot.
environment for navigation and vision.                • Open information. This robot has to be shared among
                        5
  The KHR-1 from Kondo   has been the ﬁrst humanoid     professors, laboratories, schools and universities. An
robot with good mobility capabilities (17 DOF) for a price open source hardware/software development model is
          e
under 1000  .                                           an effective way to achieve this goal.
  The Pioneer 3 (P3) is the latest version of the Pioneer
                                                      None of the platforms available on the market is re-
robot by ActivMedia. It is a large (44×38×22 cm) solid
                                                    specting these criteria. Most robots are large and thus need
platform on which the user can install custom processors,
                                                    to operate on the ﬂoor. The smallest robots are either
sensors, and actuators. The AmigoBot of the same com-
                                                    expensive or have limited functionalities. Very few are
pany is a cheaper version (1550 e) of the same concept.
                                                    open source.
  The Garcia from Acroname6  is a small robot frame
                                                      This motivated us to create the e-puck robot in summer
(25×18×10 cm) designed to be controlled by a companion
                                                    2004. We tested a ﬁrst set of prototypes with students
XScale board. The size of Garcia makes it suitable for
                                                    during the 2004–2005 academic year. Based on this ex-
experiments in compact environments. Its price is around
                                                    perience, we redesigned the robot and produced the ﬁnal
1360 e in the basic conﬁguration.
                                                    version in summer 2005 (Fig. 1). The following sections
  Robotino from Festo7 is a modern mobile robotic plat-
                                                    present the robot design and a student evaluation based on
form for education. Robotino runs a real-time Linux kernel
                                                    its use during four semesters from 2005 to 2007.
and is built around industrial standards. These features
make this robot powerful in term of computational power   IV. THE E-PUCK DESKTOP MOBILE ROBOT
but also expensive (about 4500 e). Robotino is well
                                                      We based the design of the robot on the ﬁrst two
suited for technical schools that want to approach technical
                                                    aforementioned criteria: desktop size and ﬂexibility. Com-
problems using robotics.
                                                    bined, these two constraints imply the miniaturization of
  Roomba Create from iRobot is an educational/research
                                                    a complex system. To achieve a low price, we opted
version of the roomba vacuum cleaner. Devoided of the
                                                    for the use of cheap components and mass production
 2PPRK: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜pprk/                manufacturing techniques. We took special care to make
 3
  Cye: http://www.personalrobots.com                the robot as user-friendly and interactive as possible, in
 4Evolution Robotics: http://www.evolution.com
 5Kondo: http://www.kondo-robot.com                 order to ensure that it would be well received by students.
 6Acroname: http://www.acroname.com                   In this design process, a central aspect is the choice
 7Festo: www.festo-didactic.com                     of the robot features. This particular choice is one of the
innovations of the e-puck design. The sensors, actuators,  low battery detection         3.3V regul.
and interfaces of the e-puck are representatives of a wide                                      to all
                                                            power- low battery                  devices
range of devices one can ﬁnd in several engineering sub-    on led  indicator
                                                                                                2x stepper
domains:                                                                                        motors
                                                            extension connectors
  • sensors in different modalities: audio, visual, dis-
                                                                                                body light
    tances to objects, gravity,                             programming/
  • input devices with different bandwidths from 10 Hz      debug connector
    to 10 MHz (Figure 2, left),                                            dsPIC 30F6014A       8x IR prox.
                                                                              16 Mips
                                                           RS232
  • actuators with different actions on the environment    connector     8kB RAM, 144kB FLASH
    (Figure 2, right),
                                                                                                8x Red Leds
                                                          IR remote
  • wired and wireless communication devices,             control
                                                                                                Front Led
  • two types of processors: general purpose and DSP.
                                                              bluetooth             14MHz
By exploiting this large set of possibilities, a teacher      radio link             clock      CMOS
                                                                                                color
can present and the student can practice a broad set of      RESET                              camera
engineering ﬁelds and skills.                           ON -                         1.8V
                                                        OFF   running                regul.
                                                              mode                               3D
                                                              selector                          accelero-
        INPUTS      PROCESSING     OUTPUTS                                                      meter
                                                                                                3x micro
                                                          battery 5Wh Battery audio
         10-100Hz               displacement             protection swappable and codec
 IR proximity       Generic, C prog.      Motors                  rechargeable                  speaker
          0.1-1kHz                display
Accelerometer         PIC core            Lateral LEDs
         10-40kHz                 audio
 Microphones                              Speaker          Fig. 3. The outline of the electronic of the e-puck.
                   Specific, ASM prog.
         10k-10MHz               directed
    Camera                                Front LED
                      DSP core
         1kHz serial             aesthetic
   IR remote                              Body LED    2) Sensors and actuators: To ensure a broad range of
           code
                                                    experimentation possibilities, the e-puck contains various
                                                    sensors covering different modalities:
                  radio cable
                              COMMUNICATION           • Eight infrared (IR) proximity sensors placed around

                   Bluetooth RS232                      the body measure the closeness of obstacles or the
                                                        intensity of the ambient infrared light. These are
Fig. 2. The e-puck allows exploration of different engineering topics, typical sensors for simple navigation in cluttered
control options, and signal bandwidths.                 environments.
                                                      • A 3D accelerometer provides the acceleration vector
  For applications where the basic features are not sufﬁ- of the e-puck. This vector can be used to measure
cient, the e-puck can be extended with speciﬁc hardware. the inclination of the e-puck and the acceleration
We provide embedded software consisting of a library    produced by its own movement. It can also detect
and several demo applications. We also provide an open  collisions and if the robot falls. This sensor is rarely
source simulator and a monitoring tool to run on a desktop included in miniature low-cost mobile robots. We
computer. In this section we present the detailed hardware decided to include it because it allows a rich set of
and software design choices.                            experiments.
                                                      • Three microphones capture sound. Multiple micro-
A. e-puck hardware (basic conﬁguration)                 phones allow the e-puck to localize the source of
                                                        the sound by triangulation. The bandwidth of this
  1) Microcontroller: The electronic structure of the e- signal is much larger than the one of the accelerometer
puck (Fig. 3) is built around a Microchip dsPIC mi-     or of the infrared sensors, making the microphones,
crocontroller. This microcontroller complies with the ed- because of their larger computational demands, the
ucational criteria of ﬂexibility because it embeds both ideal tools to learn how to use the DSP unit.
a 16 bit processor with a 16 entry register ﬁle and a • A color CMOS camera with a resolution of 640×480
digital signal processor (DSP) unit. This CPU runs at 64 pixels in front of the e-puck enables experimentation
MHz and provides 16 MIPS  of peak processing power.     in vision. Only a sub-part of the image can be
                                    8
The instruction set is mostly orthogonal and rich; in   grabbed: the size of acquisition is limited by the
particular, it contains multiply-acccumulate and hardware- memory size of the dsPIC and the rate is limited
repeat instructions suitable to drive the DSP unit, for by its processing power. Any format of sub-image
instance to efﬁciently compute scalar products and fast is acceptable, providing these two constraints are
fourier transforms. Finally, this processor is supported by fulﬁlled. For instance, the e-puck can grab a color
a custom tailored version of the GCC C compiler. For the image of 40×40 pixels at 4 frames per second; the
e-puck, we chose a microcontroller version with 8 kB of frame rate is doubled in gray-scale. This limitation
RAM  and 144 kB of ﬂash memory.                         shows to the students the impact of high bandwidth
                                                        sensors such as cameras.
 8
  An instruction set is orthogonal if any instruction can use data of The e-puck provides the following actuators:
any type via any addressing mode (http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Orthogonal_instruction_set)                      • Two stepper motors. They control the movement of
    the wheels with a resolution of 1000 steps per wheel
    revolution.
  • A speaker, connected to an audio codec. Combined
    with the microphones, the speaker can create a com-
                                                                                        light diffusion
    munication network with the ability to detect the                                   ring
    direction of peers. It is also an excellent output device
    for human interaction.
  • Eight red light emitting diodes (LED) placed all                                    default top
    around the e-puck. These LEDs are covered by a                                      extension turret
    translucent plastic and the e-puck can modulate their
                                                                                        extension
    intensities. They provide a visual interface with the main CPU board                connectors
    user; furthermore, another e-puck can observe them
    with its camera which allows mutual visual interac-
    tions.                                                                              left wheel
  • A set of green LEDs placed in the transparent body.                                 slot for bottom
    By lighting the body, they improve the interactions                                 extension
    with the user.
                                                                                        motors
  • A red front LED placed beside the camera. This LED
    generates a focused beam that projects a red spot
    on objects in front of the e-puck. Combined with
    the camera, this spot allows distant measurements at main mechanical
    longer range than the infrared proximity sensors.        body
                                                         right wheel
  3) User interface: The e-puck also contains several
devices to interact with the user and to communicate with                               LiIon battery
other equipments:

  • Two LEDs show the status of the battery: One indi- Fig. 4. The mechanical structure of the e-puck in an exploded view.
    cates whether the robot is powered on, while the other
    indicates a low battery condition.
  • A connector to interface to an in-circuit debugger, to B. e-puck extensions
    program the ﬂash memory and to debug code.        To address the needs of speciﬁc teaching scenarios that
  • An infrared remote control receiver, to control the e- require different mechatronics, the user can connect phys-
    puck with standard television remote controls.  ical extensions to provide additional sensors, actuators,
  • A classic RS232 serial interface to communicate with or computational power. Extensions physically connect
    a desktop computer.                             through an extension bus which routes a two wires inter-
  • A Bluetooth radio link to connect to a desktop com- processor communication bus (I2C) as well as the connec-
    puter or to communicate with up to 7 other e-pucks. tions to most sensors.
  • A reset button.                                   There are three physically different types of extensions:
  • A 16 positions rotary switch to specify a 4 bit number, “top”, “bottom”, and “sandwich”.
    which can be used, for instance, to select among pre- Top extensions do not allow other extensions above
    programmed behaviors or parameters.             them. The basic e-puck includes a default extension board
  4) Mechanics: The robot has a diameter of 75 mm   of this type which provides the speaker, the 16 positions
and a height which depends on the connected extensions. rotary switch, the infrared remote control receiver, the
The mechanical structure of the e-puck consists of injected RS232 connector, and a reset button (Fig. 1, right). There
plastic parts. We have chosen this manufacturing technique are several other extensions of this type available, for
because it reduces the unit price of the robot for sufﬁcient instance:
quantities. The robot structure is simple, being made of • A rotating scanner. It is equipped with infrared trian-
only four injected plastic parts: the main body, the light gulation distance sensors with a range of 40 cm (Fig.
ring, and the two wheels (Fig. 4). The main body is the 5, left). For exercises involving robot localization,
core of the mechanical structure and encloses the battery. the short range (2–3 cm) of the proximity sensors
The user can extract the battery from the bottom of the e- available on the basic version of the e-puck is not
puck. The two motors are simply laterally screwed onto the sufﬁcient.
main body, with the wheels directly attached to the motor • A turret with three linear cameras. It provides a very
axis. The main printed circuit board (PCB), containing most large ﬁeld of view for measuring optical ﬂow [8], [21]
of the electronics, is screwed on top of the main body. (Fig. 5, right) still requiring few memory.
A light diffusion ring and a default extension board are Bottom extensions are internal PCBs, enclosed in a
mounted over this main PCB; the user can replace the vertical slot in the front part of the main body. These
default extension board with application speciﬁc boards, extensions are close to the ground and are connected to
as illustrated by some examples in the next section. All the main PCB by an I2C bus and a power connection. For
mechanical parts are transparent and allow to observe all instance, an extension of this type provides three analog
components.                                         sensors which measure the ground color (Fig. 6, left top).
                                                      1) Bootloader: To program and debug a microcon-
                                                    troller, one typically uses an in-circuit debugger, which
                                                    is a speciﬁc piece of hardware. To reduce cost and remove
                                                    this requirement, the e-puck comes with a bootloader that
                                                    allows the user to re-program the ﬂash of the microcon-
                                                    troller through the Bluetooth or the serial port. At boot,
                                                    the bootloader listens a small amount of time for activity
                                                    on these ports, and if none is detected, launches the user
                                                    application. During this time, the user has the opportunity
                                                    to send a special command in order to ﬂash a new program.
Fig. 5. Two “top” extensions for the e-puck robot: an infrared distance 2) Low-level library: To facilitate the use of the e-
scanner (left) and a large ﬁeld of view linear camera (right). puck hardware, which requires speciﬁc code with precise
                                                    timings, we provide a collection of functions called the
                                                    “Low-Level Library”. This library contains functions such
                                                    as “move the right motor at that speed”, “read 40×40 pixel
                                                    image”, or “send this message through Bluetooth”. It is
                                                    statically linked with the user application at compile time.
                                                      3) BTcom  protocol: When developing for a robot, it
                                                    is often useful to be able to control it from a desktop
                                                    computer. To that end, the e-puck comes with a moni-
                                                    tor implementing a remote control protocol through the
                                                    Bluetooth or the serial port, called the “BTcom protocol”.
                                                    This protocol provides full remote control of the e-puck,
                                                    allowing the desktop computer to set the speed of the
                                                    motors, read the image of the camera, specify the state of
                                                    the LEDs, read the accelerometer, and so on. This allows
                                                    the user to develop applications on a desktop computer,
                                                    in a comfortable environment with a rich set of develop-
                                                    ment tools. Moreover, with this approach, applications can
                                                    exceed the computational capabilities of the dsPIC. The
                                                    same strategy can be used to control the e-puck from a
                                                    simulator, such as Enki or Webots.
Fig. 6. Left top: A bottom extension to measure the ground color. Left
bottom: a “sandwich” extension implementing a Zigbee radio link. Right:
A complete visual communication system consisting of two “sandwich”
extensions.                                         D. e-puck simulation

                                                      Several simulators support the e-puck. Among them,
  Extensions can also be “sandwich” boards that replicate we use Webots and Enki. Webots [13] is commercial
                                                                                                    10
the connector on their top, for instance:           and supports three-dimensional physics through the ODE
                                                    library. Enki11 is open source and provides fast 2D physics,
  • a Zigbee radio link with adjustable radio communica- which, for instance, makes it suitable for evolutionary
    tion range does not require mechanical access to the robotics experiments [7].
    top of the e-puck [4] (Fig. 6, left bottom);
  • a color RGB LED ring (Fig. 6 right);
  • an omnidirectional vision turret with onboard micro- E. Availability
    controller dedicated to vision (Fig. 6 right)
                                                      All our software, design, and production documents are
Several extensions of this type can be stacked, and a top
                                                    available under an open source hardware/software license,
turret placed above (Fig. 6 right).
                                                    meaning that anyone can use and modify them as long as
                                                    they comply with the license.
C. e-puck embedded software                           Currently, two companies (GCtronic and AAI Japan)
  To develop software for the e-puck, we provide stan- produce the e-puck and about ten companies distribute it
dard components: a bootloader to program the e-puck under the term of the open hardware license. A growing
over Bluetooth, a low-level library to drive the hardware, community is using the e-puck both for research and
and a monitor to communicate with a desktop computer. education (see for instance [1], [20], [18], [12], [11], [5],
Within the community of e-puck users, standard software [2], [10], [14], [9], [17]).
modules are also developed. For instance a Player server is The production price of the e-puck basic version is
developed by VeRLab9. These components are all released around 250 e. The selling price by most companies is
under the e-puck open source license.               around 550 e.

 9Player driver for the e-puck robot: http://code.google.com/ 10Open Dynamics Engine: http://www.ode.org
p/epuck-player-driver/                                11Enki: http://home.gna.org/enki/
  V. ENGINEERING EDUCATION USING THE E-PUCK             their awareness of the differences between various
                 ROBOT AT EPFL                          types of implementation levels; for example realistic
                                                        simulations and real experiments.
  At EPFL, several courses exploit the e-puck robot as ex-
                                                      • Position estimation and path ﬁnding of a mobile robot
perimentation platform. In particular we organize practical                                          .
exercices in the following teaching areas:              In a 10 hours practical session we use the e-puck
                                                        to explore robot localization and path ﬁnding. These
  • Signal processing. We use the e-puck to explore signal techniques are active ﬁelds of research and begin
    processing on sound, which is an optimal context for to see deployment in industry [6]. They are usually
    education because of the signal low frequency, low  implemented using expensive sensors such as laser
    propagation speed, ease of generation, acquisition, range ﬁnder [19], which, because of limited education
    and direct perception by humans. In our embedded    budgets, often restricts their teaching to simulation.
    programming course we explore signal processing ap- Yet simulation is not always sufﬁcient to fully un-
    plications during two sessions of ﬁve hours each. We derstand what is critical for correct functionality on
    analyze the sound using a fast fourier transform (FFT), physical robots. The e-puck, with the distance scanner
    with a close attention to its efﬁcient implementation extension (see Section IV-B and Fig. 5, left), allows
    on the DSP unit. In each session, we ﬁrst present   students to explore these techniques in a physical
    the theory; then the students verify it on MATLAB   setup.
    with data acquired from the robot, and ﬁnally they
    implement it on the dsPIC of the e-puck.           VI. EVALUATION OF E-PUCK BY THE STUDENTS
  • Automatic control. In our embedded programming
                                                      Our embedded programming course using the e-puck
    course, we apply automatic control concepts on the
                                                    has been evaluated on a regular basis since the introduction
    e-puck. The goal of the ﬁve hours session is to build
                                                    of the e-puck in 2005. The goal of this course is the
    a regulator that controls the e-puck and maintains a
                                                    understanding and practice of embedded programming.
    constant distance with respect to a visual target (Fig.
                                                    Most of the course focuses on C programming, with links
    7, left). The input of a proportional-integral regulator
                                                    to assembler and some concepts of C++. Practicals explore
    is the estimated distance to the target, extracted from
                                                    signal processing and control problems. The students who
    the camera looking at a vertical black stripe on a white
                                                    attend this course are not specialized in robotics. All the
    background (Fig. 7, right). The output of the regulator
                                                    programming exercises of this course are performed using
    is assigned to the speed of both wheels, reducing the
                                                    the e-puck as a motivation tool.
    problem to one degree of freedom.
                                                      Over the ﬁrst three years of e-puck use, students were
                                                    asked to give feedback about the use of the e-puck to
                                                    illustrate the concepts of the course. Fig. 8 summarizes
                                                    the results of this analysis and shows that more than 90
                                                    percent of the students agree that the e-puck is a good
                                                    tool to illustrate the concepts of the course. The score has
                                                    slightly improved over the years, with the ﬁne-tuning of
                                                    the course.
Fig. 7. Model of the problem (left) and scheme of the regulator (right)
for the e-puck automatic control practical.
                                                     The e-puck robot is a good tool to illustrate the concepts of the course
                                                                                         June 2007, 48 students, 
                                                                                         on ASM, C and C++ 
  • Behaviour-based robotics. In a robotics course, we                                   programming

    use the e-puck to provide the students with a better                                 June 2006, 79 students, 
    understanding of the subsumption architecture [3],                                   on C++ programming
                                                                                         February 2006, 90 students, 
    its advantages and its shortcomings. The goal of the                                 on ASM, C programming
                                                                                         February 2005, 56 students, 
    exercise is to implement a behavior-based controller                                 on ASM, C programming

    for a simpliﬁed industrial application consisting of the totally agree partially agree no opinion partially disagree totally disagree
    transport of goods throughout a warehouse. The e-
    puck (the carrier) has to follow a line painted on the Fig. 8. Comparison between the evaluations of the e-puck robot as
    ground (the track), while avoiding obstacles and going teaching tool.
    back to the line after disruption. To that end, the e-
    puck is equipped with the ground sensor extension When asked about the quality of the e-puck, students
    (see Section IV-B and Fig. 6, left top).        gave the feedback shown in Fig. 9. These results show that
  • Distributed intelligent systems. Our course on dis- the latest version of e-puck is considered as performing
    tributed intelligent systems (formerly focusing on well by more than 90 percent of the students. We observe
    swarm intelligence) includes weekly laboratory ex- a clear improvement since the ﬁrst version evaluated in
    ercises in which the students use a combination of February 2005.
    real e-puck robots and realistic simulations using
    Webots [13] to test and verify the topics and the-              VII. CONCLUSION
    ories presented in lectures. This help the students The e-puck robot is an innovative education tool for
    to assimilate theoretical concepts around multi-robot engineering in a broad sense. For its size and price, it is a
    coordination and networking, and to understand the complex systems that we exploit to teach a wide range of
    difﬁculties of implementing them. This also enhances topics. By integrating the latest technologies in a compact
   The e-puck robot is performing well                                [12] Mattias Jacobsson, Sara Ljungblad, Johan Bodin, Jeffrey Knurek,
                                                      June 2007,           and Lars Erik Holmquist.    Glowbots: robots that evolve rela-
                                                      48 students, on V2   tionships. In SIGGRAPH ’07: ACM    SIGGRAPH 2007 emerging
                                                      June 2006,           technologies, page 7, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.
                                                      79 students, on V2 [13] Olivier Michel. Webots: Professional Mobile Robot Simulation.
                                                      February 2006,       International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 1(1):39–42,
                                                      90 students, on V2   2004.
                                                      February 2005,  [14] Yasser F. O. Mohammad and Toyoaki Nishida. TalkBack: Feedback
                                                      56 students, on V1   from a Miniature Robot, pages 357–366. Springer, 2007.
    totally agree partially agree no opinion partially disagree totally disagree [15] F. Mondada, E. Franzi, and P. Ienne. Mobile robot miniaturization:
                                                                           A  tool for investigation in control algorithms. In T. Yoshikawa
Fig. 9. Comparison between the evaluation of the quality of the e-puck     and F. Miyazaki, editors, Proceedings of the Third International
robot and its on-board software, following its evolution over the years    Symposium   on Simulation on Experimental Robotics (ISER-93),
and versions.                                                              volume 200 of Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences,
                                                                           pages 501–513. Springer, 1993.
                                                                      [16] R.R. Murphy. “competing” for a robotics education. Robotics and
                                                                           Automation Magazine, IEEE, 8(2):44–55, Jun 2001.
design, it repositions robotics in the engineering education          [17] F. Rastegar and M.N. Ahmadabadi. Grounding abstraction in sen-
landscape. More than 200 students over 3 years have                        sory experience. Advanced intelligent mechatronics, 2007 ieee/asme
                                                                           international conference on, pages 1–8, 2007.
validated this concept and shown their satisfaction using             [18] P. Roduit, A. Martinoli, and J. Jacot. A quantitative method
the e-puck. The open-source nature of this robot improves                  for comparing trajectories of mobile robots using point distribu-
the quality of the support to the students by providing                    tion models.  Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2007. IROS 2007.
                                                                           IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 2441–2448, 2007.
full access to knowledge at every level. For teachers this            [19] Roland Siegwart and Illah R. Nourbakhsh.   Introduction to Au-
simpliﬁes maintenance and opens new             experimentation            tonomous Mobile Robots. MIT Press, 2004.
possibilities. Finally, the rapid diffusion of the e-puck in          [20] Vlad M. Trifa, Christopher M. Cianci, and Dominique Guinard.
                                                                           Dynamic Control of a Robotic Swarm    using a Service-Oriented
the research community shows its versatility as a scientiﬁc                Architecture. In 13th International Symposium on Artiﬁcial Life
experimentation tool.                                                      and Robotics (AROB 2008), 2008.
                                                                      [21] Jean-Christophe Zufferey and Dario Floreano. Toward 30-gram
                                                                           Autonomous Indoor Aircraft: Vision-based Obstacle Avoidance and
                 VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
                                                                           Altitude Control. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
   We thank    EPFL   for funding the development of the e-                Automation (ICRA’2005), pages 2594– 2599, 2005.
puck robot through its Funding Program for Teaching and
Learning. We also thank the Pedagogical Research and
Support team     of  EPFL  for the detailed evaluation of the
e-puck educational performances. We ﬁnally thank our
students for their constructive feedback.

                          REFERENCES

  [1] Alberto Acerbi, Davide Marocco, and Stefano Nolﬁ. Social facil-
      itation on the development of foraging behaviors in a population
      of autonomous robots. Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, 4648:625–634,
      2007.
  [2] Saeed Amizadeh, Majid Nili Ahmadabadi, Babak N. Araabi, and
      Roland Siegwart. A bayesian approach to conceptualization using
      reinforcement learning. Advanced intelligent mechatronics, 2007
      ieee/asme international conference on, pages 1–7, 2007.
  [3] Rodney A. Brooks. Cambrian Intelligence. MIT Press, 1999.
  [4] Christopher M. Cianci, Xavier Raemy, Jim Pugh, and Alcherio
      Martinoli. Communication in a Swarm of Miniature Robots: The e-
      Puck as an Educational Tool for Swarm Robotics. In Simulation of
      Adaptive Behavior (SAB-2006), Swarm Robotics Workshop, pages
      103–115, 2006, Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2007), vol.
      4433.
  [5] Roozbeh Daneshvar, Abdolhossein Sadeghi Marascht, Hossein Am-
      inaiee, and Caro Lucas. A Quantitative Investigation into Distribu-
      tion of Memory and Learning in Multi Agent Systems with Implicit
      Communications, volume 4850, pages 124–133. Springer, 2007.
  [6] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey. Simultaneous localization and
      mapping: part i.  Robotics and Automation Magazine, IEEE,
      13(2):99–110, June 2006.
  [7] Dario Floreano, Sara Mitri, St ephane´ Magnenat, and Laurent Keller.
      Evolutionary Conditions for the Emergence of Communication in
      Robots. Current Biology, 17:514–519, 2007.
  [8] N. Franceschini, J. M. Pichon, C. Blanes, and J. M. Brady. From
      insect vision to robot vision [and discussion]. Philosophical
      Transactions: Biological Sciences, 337(1281):283–294, 1992.
  [9] O. Gigliotta and S. Nolﬁ. Formation of spatial representations in
      evolving autonomous robots. Artiﬁcial Life, 2007. ALIFE ’07. IEEE
      Symposium on, pages 171–178, 2007.
[10] Babak N. Araabi Hadi Firouzi, Majid Nili Ahmadabadi.      A
      probabilistic reinforcement-based approach to conceptualization.
      International Journal of Intelligent Technology, 3:48–55, 2008.
[11] Daisuke Kurabayashi Herianto, Toshiki Sakakibara.   Artiﬁcial
      pheromone system using rﬁd for navigation of autonomous robots.
      Journal of Bionic Engineering, 4:245–253, 2007.